EDITORIAL FOREWORD 

The first volume in The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek was the last book that Hayek wrote, The Fatal Conceit. It was the first volume in two respects: it was volume 1 in the series, and it was the first published, in 1988. The founding general editor was the philosopher W. W. Bartley III, and he initially envisioned that the series would contain twenty-two volumes—at least, that was what was noted in the material describing the planned series in The Fatal Conceit. Wisely, Bartley added the proviso that “the plan is provisional.” It is now anticipated that there will be nineteen volumes in all, but the original proviso still applies.

Much has happened since 1988. A second volume produced under Bartley’s editorship was published in 1991, but it was a posthumous contribution, Bartley having succumbed to cancer in February 1990. Soon thereafter Stephen Kresge took over the position of general editor, and under him five more volumes were produced. The volumes in the series did not appear in numerical order: to date, volumes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10 have been published.

In spring 2002 Stephen Kresge asked me whether I might be interested in becoming the next general editor. I was, and after the Hayek family and representatives from the University of Chicago Press and Routledge all signed off, my work began. The first year or so was taken up with getting editorial material shifted from California to North Carolina, rethinking the ordering of the volumes, establishing relationships with existing and potential volume editors, and seeking funds to support the project.

The Road to Serfdom: Text and Documents—The Definitive Edition is the first volume to appear under the new general editorship. Others are on the way. I anticipate fairly steady progress over the next few years as the project moves toward completion. 

In the first volume Bill Bartley briefly stated the editorial policy for the series as follows: “The texts of subsequent volumes will be published in corrected, revised and annotated form” and “essays which exist in slightly variant forms, or in several different languages, will be published always in English or in English translation, and only in their most complete and finished form unless some variation, or the timing thereof, is of theoretical or historical significance.” These policies will continue to be followed in the present volume and those to come.

For The Road to Serfdom the following editorial decisions were made. The British edition came out in March 1944, and the American in September of that year. The text for the American edition was reset, principally to replace phrases like “this country” with “England.” Because the American edition is accordingly clearer (that is, it does not presume that the reader knows that “this country” refers to England), it was chosen for the text. Accordingly, “American English” is used throughout—in this regard this volume differs from others in the series, in which “British English” has mainly been used. Typographical errors were silently corrected, except where Hayek provided an incorrect citation. In those cases the correction is made and noted. At many points in the book Hayek quotes others, and his quotations do not always exactly duplicate the original. However, only when his misquoting might affect the meaning of the passage is this noted; in any event, what Hayek originally wrote stands.

Each volume in The Collected Works is intended to be a definitive presentation of Hayek’s work. As such, when the University of Chicago Press proposed that we add the subtitle “The Definitive Edition” I initially resisted, thinking it in-appropriate to single out this volume from the rest. The Road to Serfdom is unique, however, in that it is the only piece of Hayek’s work to go through numerous editions: the original one in 1944, another in 1956 to which Hayek added a foreword, a 1976 edition to which he added a new preface, and the 1994 50th anniversary edition which carried an introduction by Milton Friedman. The subtitle was added, and I hope that this will always be considered the definitive edition. History suggests, however, that it may not be the last one.

Many have been involved in helping me get started as the new general editor. I owe a special debt to Mrs. Dorothy Morris of the Morris Foundation, Little Rock, who provided me with the “seed money” needed to initiate a search for additional funding for the project. As has been documented in forewords to preceding volumes in the series, Dorothy’s husband Walter Morris was instrumental in the creation of The Collected Works project, and the Morris Foundation has been constant in its support throughout the years. I first sought financial support for the project at the Mont Pèlerin meetings in London in October 2002, and John Blundell of the Institute of Economic Affairs provided me both advice on how to proceed and assistance in arranging for a fellowship to help defray the costs of attendance. The meeting ultimately led me to David Kennedy and Ingrid Gregg of the Earhart Foundation, and to Emilio Pacheco of the Liberty Fund and the Pierre F. and Enid Goodrich Foundation. These organizations have provided the lion’s share of support for the project. Finally, Stephen Kresge has been an advisor, mentor, sounding board, and friend throughout the very long transition from second to third general editor, and beyond. To all of them my most sincere thanks.

I also would like to thank the following people and organizations for granting their permission to reproduce materials and quote from letters: Mr. Frank B. Knight for permission to reproduce Frank Knight’s reader’s report on The Road to Serfdom; Dr. Thomas Marschak for permission to reproduce Jacob Marschak’s reader’s report on The Road to Serfdom; Mr. David Michaelis for permission to quote from Ordway Tead’s letter of September 25, 1943, to Fritz Machlup; and the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace for permission to quote from materials contained in the Hoover Institution Archives. 

Last but not least, I gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Emily Wilcox and Jason Schenker in preparing the manuscript.

Bruce Caldwell 
Greensboro, NC 